Sarah Chen: Welcome back everyone. Three items today. Rate limiting decision, dashboard architecture update, and the latency incident follow-up.
Sarah Chen: Marcus, let's start with rate limiting. You had both prototypes ready. What's the recommendation?
Marcus Thompson: I built both and ran load tests against them. Here's what I found. Token bucket handles burst traffic much better. Under a sustained burst of fifty requests in one second from a single merchant, token bucket accepted all of them because the bucket had accumulated tokens over the idle period. Sliding window rejected thirty-eight of them because it only looks at the current window.
Marcus Thompson: For steady-state traffic, both perform identically. The Redis overhead is negligible for both — we're talking sub-millisecond per check. Code complexity is similar. I'm recommending token bucket based on Dave's point from Monday about the billing batch processing use case.
Dave Rossi: I tested Marcus's token bucket implementation against a simulated month-end invoice batch. It handled it perfectly. The merchant accumulated tokens throughout the month and then spent them all in one burst. Sliding window would have rejected most of those requests.
Sarah Chen: Alright, decision made. We are going with token bucket for the rate limiter. Marcus, please finalize the implementation and get it merged by end of day tomorrow. I'll update the architecture decision record.
Marcus Thompson: Already done, actually. Merged it this afternoon. Commit e5f6a7b.
Sarah Chen: Perfect. Next, Priya. I heard you want to change the data fetching strategy for the dashboard?
Priya Sharma: Yes. So the design doc says REST polling at thirty-second intervals, and that's what I implemented initially. But after yesterday's latency incident on the transactions endpoint, I've been rethinking this. Thirty seconds is a long time for a merchant to wait to see if their payment went through. And the polling creates unnecessary load on the API even when nothing has changed.
Priya Sharma: I'm proposing we switch to WebSocket for transaction updates. The server pushes updates to connected clients only when something actually changes. This gives us true real-time feedback for merchants and reduces API load by eliminating the constant polling.
Marcus Thompson: I'm on board with this. We already have FastAPI running, which has native WebSocket support. I can set up the ALB listener rule for WebSocket upgrade. It's not a lot of infrastructure work.
Dave Rossi: What happens when the WebSocket connection drops? Merchants on flaky connections are going to miss updates.
Priya Sharma: Good question. I'm building in automatic reconnection with exponential backoff. And if the WebSocket connection can't be established at all, it falls back to REST polling at thirty seconds. So we never lose functionality — WebSocket is an enhancement, not a hard dependency.
Sarah Chen: I like it. Going forward, the merchant dashboard will use WebSocket for real-time transaction updates with REST polling as a fallback. Priya, please update the design document when you have the implementation stable.
Priya Sharma: Will do.
Sarah Chen: Last item. Lisa, you investigated the latency incident yesterday. Can you give us the summary?
Lisa Park: Sure. Wednesday afternoon, p99 latency on the merchant transactions endpoint hit 4.2 seconds. Our SLA is two seconds. I traced it to the get_merchant_transactions query in the billing service. It was doing a full table scan on the payments table because there was no composite index on merchant_id and created_at.
Lisa Park: This query worked fine when we had a hundred merchants, but we're at two thousand now and the payments table has over eight million rows. I added the composite index yesterday morning and p99 dropped to 180 milliseconds. Fix is deployed and verified in production.
Dave Rossi: That's my fault. I wrote that query a year ago and never added the index. Lisa caught something I should have caught months ago. Nice work, Lisa.
James O'Brien: This is exactly why we need better database monitoring. Lisa, I've assigned you PAY-208 to build a Datadog dashboard for database query performance. Let's make sure we catch these before merchants notice.
Lisa Park: Already on my list. I want to include the queries Dave flagged during the incident debrief too — there are a few other billing queries that might have the same problem as we scale.
Sarah Chen: Good. Alright, that wraps it up. See everyone at Friday standup.